README.md, before:

﻿# Learning
This repository serves as a base for a 2D Godot game, specifically one that involves more complex movement, i.e., movement that has many factors that affect it in various ways. This complex movement can be done while maintaining modularity and reusability between these different factors of movement. This is because of the "velocity source/aggregate" and "modifiers/value with modifiers" software design used (more info in the [software design notes](#software-design-notes)). The movement also utilizes the power of Godot's Tweens for smoother and more customizable movement.

The current code in this repository provides an example usage of this software design, in the form of a 2D platformer MVP. Though, the design can be used for non-platformer games, and the design can be used for 3D games (though, this project doesn't support 3D complex movement).

The player in the example game MVP can be controlled with the following keyboard keys:
- A or Left, to move left
- D or Right, to move right
- W, Up, or Space, to jump

## Environment
This project uses Godot 4.2 ([4.2.1-stable with .NET](https://godotengine.org/download/archive/4.2.1-stable/) was used; .NET is needed since this project uses C# instead of GDScript). .NET 6.0 was used for this project.

## How to use (developer)
### Complex Movement
Here is how to create complex movement for an entity in Godot using this repository:
1. In the Godot editor, create a `CharacterBody2D` node, and create and attach a script that extends `VelocityAggregatingKinematicComp` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/`). For this example, we'll call the class `Player`.
2. Create a child Node for that `CharacterBody2D`, and create and attach a script that extends `VelocityAggregate` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/`). For this example, we'll call the class `PlayerVelocity` (you can also see `Scripts/Entity/Physics/PlayerVelocityAggregate.cs` to see an example of how this would be coded).
3. In the `CharacterBody2D` node, select the `PlayerVelocity` node as the value for the field "Velocity Replacer".
4. Come up with the velocity sources (and possibly any "intermediates") for your `PlayerVelocity`. For this, you'll need to think about how you want your player to be able to move, and break that movement down into different, independent components.
   - See ["Velocity Sources/Aggregate" Design](#velocity-sourcesaggregate-design) for more information on the design of velocity sources and intermediates.
5. Create your velocity sources and intermediates. For each of the ones you came up with:
   1. Create a child Node for your `PlayerVelocity` node, and create and attach a script that extends `VelocitySource` (if it's an independent component) or `Node` (if it's an intermediate).
   2. Program the necessary behavior for the velocity source/intermediate. For velocity sources, be sure to read the documentation comments in `VelocitySource` to see what it provides. Note that the velocity sources shouldn't know about or call any of the intermediates.
      - When programming your intermediates to modify your velocity sources, you might want to have your intermediates give modifiers to values in the velocity source. See [Data Modifiers](#data-modifiers) for how to give and accept modifiers.
   3. Create a child Node for your `PlayerVelocity` node, and create and extend a script that extends `DefaultPhys` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/`). When programming this script, you take `KinematicComp` physics interactions and call methods in your velocity source/intermediate as appropriate, by overriding the appropriate "On..." methods in `DefaultPhys`.
      - Do this instead of having your velocity source/intermediate store and use a reference to the `KinematicComp`/`Player`/etc. This is so that you're able to specify different physics behavior if needed (e.g., by subclassing your script, or by unsubscribing from the events that call specific "On..." methods), instead of being stuck with one set of physics behaviors. This can be useful when reusing your velocity sources/intermediates for a different entity, and want to specify (slightly) different physics behaviors for it.
6. Program your `PlayerVelocity` to define methods for your `Player` to call, to affect the velocity sources and intermediates (for example, my `PlayerVelocityAggregate` has public methods `MoveLeft`, `AttemptJump`, etc.). Your `PlayerVelocity` also needs to define any other interactions and rules among your velocity sources, intermediates, and any (non-default) physics interactions, so that your `PlayerVelocity` behaves the way you want it to.
7. When making other entities, you can now reuse the velocity sources, intermediates, and default physics you made for your `Player`!

### Data Modifiers
When designing an "intermediate" (see above for more info on intermediates) to affect a velocity source, you might want to modify the data that the velocity source uses for its movement. For example, my `Falling` velocity source uses a `FallingData` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/VelocitySources/`) resource to determine falling velocity, acceleration, etc. Then, my `WallDragging` affects my `Falling` to simulate the vertical movement of dragging on a wall. It does this by adding modifiers to the `FallingData`'s values to make the `Falling`'s movement feel more like wall dragging than actual falling.

Let's first walk through modifiers. Two core interfaces are at play with modifiers: `IModifier` and `IValueWithModifiers`. `IModifier` calculates an (arbitrary) value based on a given value, and `IValueWithModifiers` can aggregate zero to many `IModifiers` by calling them one-by-one on base/modified values to get a single final modified value. More information is in the documentation comments of these interfaces, located in `Scripts/Values/Modifiers`.

To utilize data modifiers for your velocity sources and intermediates, you first need to have your data values be able to accept modifiers. You can implement your own classes implementing `IValueWithModifiers`, or use `ValueWithModifiers` (a basic implementation).

But, you will probably want to use/extend `ResourceWithModifiers` (located in `Scripts/Values/Groups`), which holds a group of `IValueWithModifier`s (see also `IValueWithModifiersGroup`, located in `Scripts/Values/Groups/`). This is because `ResourceWithValues` also extends Godot's `Resource`, so you can specify the base values for these `IValueWithModifier`s in the Godot editor, as well as save these base values to be reused elsewhere. `FallingData` is an example of how a `ResourceWithModifiers` would be implemented.

Second, you need to make the modifier(s) for the data. You can create your own modifiers by implementing `IModifier`, but there are already several basic implementations in `Scripts/Values/Modifiers`.

But, you will probably want to use/extend `ModifierResource` (located in `Scripts/Values/Groups`), which holds a group of `IModifier`s (see also `IModifierGroup`, located in `Scripts/Values/Groups/`) that modify specific `IValueWithModifier`s in an `IValueWithModifiersGroup`. `FallingDataMultiplier` is an example of how a `ModifierResource` would be implemented. (however, `WallDragging` uses `WallDraggingData` to modify a `Falling`, and `WallDraggingData` is both a `ResourceWithModifiers` and an `IModifierGroup` (since the wall dragging data itself can be modified)).

## Software Design Notes

### "Velocity Sources/Aggregate" Design

In order to perform complex movement while maintaining modularity and reusability, the different causes of movement are split into different, independent components called "velocity sources". A "velocity aggregate" is composed of these velocity sources, and can produce a single velocity vector by taking an aggregate of the velocity vectors for all the velocity sources (by default, this is just the sum of all the velocity vectors). This single velocity vector would represent the velocity of the player or some other entity.

For example, the velocity of my player in this repository breaks down into two components: `Falling` (velocity affected by gravity) and `LeftRight` (velocity due to the player wanting to move left or right) (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/VelocitySources/`.

Note that when creating the velocity sources for an entity's movement, some desired behaviors are not independent of these components. For example, my player can also jump and drag on walls, but these are both things that are affected by gravity, something already covered by `Falling`. So, instead of creating a velocity source for these behaviors, you would want to create an "intermediate" (they currently don't have a common superclass/interface) that calls the methods of the relevant velocity source(s) to affect velocity. For example, the intermediates `Jumping` and `WallDragging` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/Intermediate/`) call upon `Falling`'s methods to affect falling velocity.

The velocity sources themselves are independent of each other and don't know about each other, but the velocity aggregate may produce rules and behaviors for interactions (one-way or two-way) between velocity sources/intermediates, unbeknownst to the velocity sources and intermediates. The velocity aggregate is where all of these velocity sources and intermediates come together. So, when subclassing a velocity source, the job of the subclass is to make sure that the specific velocity sources and intermediates concerned by the subclass act nicely with each other, to produce the desired behavior. This is done here so that it doesn't have to be done in the code for the velocity sources and intermediates (which would've introduced unwanted dependencies between certain velocity sources/intermediates).

This design uses the Component pattern, where the velocity sources and intermediates are the components, and the velocity aggregates compose these components.

#### Motivation

In [a much earlier commit](https://github.com/uuhhhh/Learning/tree/43573f5a37a382273acd1792acb342684beda854) in this repository, the code for the player movement was in one class, including left/right movement, ground/air/wall jumping, coyote jumping, jump buffering, jump cancelling, wall dragging, and smooth movement using Tweens. It did work properly, and for some project scopes, it'd be sufficient to keep player movement code in one class. However, there were key drawbacks to that approach, which this current repository aims to solve.

First, movement behaviors weren't reusable between different entities. While currently the only entity is the player, if one wanted to make another entity with some of the player's movement behaviors and some of its own movement behaviors, nontrivial amounts of code would have to be duplicated. This is unsustainable, especially if there were to be even more different entities. The separation of movement behaviors into independent, reusable components aims to solve this issue, where the entities can be composed of the components of the movement features they need, without duplicating code.

Second, the more different movement features are added to this player movement class, the less maintainable the class becomes. This is because with more movement features, there are more and more rules for these features and their interactions. Even with just the 2D platformer MVP, there are a lot of rules in play, even if it may not look like it. Some examples are:
- What happens when the player transitions from the air to the ground while stopping, and there's different horizontal movement acceleration for the ground and air
- How much control the player should have over their horizontal movement speed moments after a wall jump
- The exact conditions for when the player should start wall dragging instead of falling normally
- What should happen if the player touches the ground or a wall while a coyote jump timer is still active
- And much more

With more and more rules, it can become harder to make changes to this player movement class without breaking something, especially when trying to utilize the power of Godot's Tweens while doing so. So, the separation of movement behaviors into components accomplishes another thing: it separates the concerns of different rules into different classes. For instance, `Falling` can concern rules of when exactly to accelerate and decelerate; `Jumping` can concern rules of which type of jump (ground/air/wall jump) to use and when, as well as rules of coyote jumping and jump buffering; velocity sources and intermediates, internally, don't have to worry about Tweens from other velocity sources; etc. `PlayerVelocityAggregate` no longer has to worry about lower-level rules such as exact Tween creation processes, and the internal rules of its velocity sources and intermediates.

### "Data Modifiers" Design

### Design outside of the movement

## Acknowledgement
This project started off as a learning project for me to learn Godot (hence the repository name "Learning") that followed [this tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL9FzW-m48fn0i9GYBoTY-SI3yOBZjH1kJ), but has since then deviated greatly in terms of code, content, and goals (and the tutorial used GDScript and not C#).

Commit message:

added data modifiers design to the readme

README.md, after:

﻿# Learning
This repository serves as a base for a 2D Godot game, specifically one that involves more complex movement, i.e., movement that has many factors that affect it in various ways. This complex movement can be done while maintaining modularity and reusability between these different factors of movement. This is because of the "velocity source/aggregate" and "modifiers/value with modifiers" software design used (more info in the [software design notes](#software-design-notes)). The movement also utilizes the power of Godot's Tweens for smoother and more customizable movement.

The current code in this repository provides an example usage of this software design, in the form of a 2D platformer MVP. Though, the design can be used for non-platformer games, and the design can be used for 3D games (though, this project doesn't support 3D complex movement).

The player in the example game MVP can be controlled with the following keyboard keys:
- A or Left, to move left
- D or Right, to move right
- W, Up, or Space, to jump

## Environment
This project uses Godot 4.2 ([4.2.1-stable with .NET](https://godotengine.org/download/archive/4.2.1-stable/) was used; .NET is needed since this project uses C# instead of GDScript). .NET 6.0 was used for this project.

## How to use (developer)
### Complex Movement
Here is how to create complex movement for an entity in Godot using this repository:
1. In the Godot editor, create a `CharacterBody2D` node, and create and attach a script that extends `VelocityAggregatingKinematicComp` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/`). For this example, we'll call the class `Player`.
2. Create a child Node for that `CharacterBody2D`, and create and attach a script that extends `VelocityAggregate` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/`). For this example, we'll call the class `PlayerVelocity` (you can also see `Scripts/Entity/Physics/PlayerVelocityAggregate.cs` to see an example of how this would be coded).
3. In the `CharacterBody2D` node, select the `PlayerVelocity` node as the value for the field "Velocity Replacer".
4. Come up with the velocity sources (and possibly any "intermediates") for your `PlayerVelocity`. For this, you'll need to think about how you want your player to be able to move, and break that movement down into different, independent components.
   - See ["Velocity Sources/Aggregate" Design](#velocity-sourcesaggregate-design) for more information on the design of velocity sources and intermediates.
5. Create your velocity sources and intermediates. For each of the ones you came up with:
   1. Create a child Node for your `PlayerVelocity` node, and create and attach a script that extends `VelocitySource` (if it's an independent component) or `Node` (if it's an intermediate).
   2. Program the necessary behavior for the velocity source/intermediate. For velocity sources, be sure to read the documentation comments in `VelocitySource` to see what it provides. Note that the velocity sources shouldn't know about or call any of the intermediates.
      - When programming your intermediates to modify your velocity sources, you might want to have your intermediates give modifiers to values in the velocity source. See [Data Modifiers](#data-modifiers) for how to give and accept modifiers.
   3. Create a child Node for your `PlayerVelocity` node, and create and extend a script that extends `DefaultPhys` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/`). When programming this script, you take `KinematicComp` physics interactions and call methods in your velocity source/intermediate as appropriate, by overriding the appropriate "On..." methods in `DefaultPhys`.
      - Do this instead of having your velocity source/intermediate store and use a reference to the `KinematicComp`/`Player`/etc. This is so that you're able to specify different physics behavior if needed (e.g., by subclassing your script, or by unsubscribing from the events that call specific "On..." methods), instead of being stuck with one set of physics behaviors. This can be useful when reusing your velocity sources/intermediates for a different entity, and want to specify (slightly) different physics behaviors for it.
6. Program your `PlayerVelocity` to define methods for your `Player` to call, to affect the velocity sources and intermediates (for example, my `PlayerVelocityAggregate` has public methods `MoveLeft`, `AttemptJump`, etc.). Your `PlayerVelocity` also needs to define any other interactions and rules among your velocity sources, intermediates, and any (non-default) physics interactions, so that your `PlayerVelocity` behaves the way you want it to.
7. When making other entities, you can now reuse the velocity sources, intermediates, and default physics you made for your `Player`!

### Data Modifiers
When designing an "intermediate" (see above for more info on intermediates) to affect a velocity source, you might want to modify the data that the velocity source uses for its movement. For example, my `Falling` velocity source uses a `FallingData` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/VelocitySources/`) resource to determine falling velocity, acceleration, etc. Then, my `WallDragging` affects my `Falling` to simulate the vertical movement of dragging on a wall. It does this by adding modifiers to the `FallingData`'s values to make the `Falling`'s movement feel more like wall dragging than actual falling.

Let's first walk through modifiers. Two core interfaces are at play with modifiers: `IModifier` and `IValueWithModifiers`. `IModifier` calculates an (arbitrary) value based on a given value, and `IValueWithModifiers` can aggregate any number of `IModifiers` by calling them one-by-one on base/modified values to get a single final modified value. More information is in the documentation comments of these interfaces, located in `Scripts/Values/Modifiers`.

To utilize data modifiers for your velocity sources and intermediates, you first need to have your data values be able to accept modifiers. You can implement your own classes implementing `IValueWithModifiers`, or use `ValueWithModifiers` (a basic implementation).

But, you will probably want to use/extend `ResourceWithModifiers` (located in `Scripts/Values/Groups`), which holds a group of `IValueWithModifier`s (see also `IValueWithModifiersGroup`, located in `Scripts/Values/Groups/`). This is because `ResourceWithValues` also extends Godot's `Resource`, so you can specify the base values for these `IValueWithModifier`s in the Godot editor, as well as save these base values to be reused elsewhere. `FallingData` is an example of how a `ResourceWithModifiers` would be implemented.

Second, you need to make the modifier(s) for the data. You can create your own modifiers by implementing `IModifier`, but there are already several basic implementations in `Scripts/Values/Modifiers`.

But, you will probably want to use/extend `ModifierResource` (located in `Scripts/Values/Groups`), which holds a group of `IModifier`s (see also `IModifierGroup`, located in `Scripts/Values/Groups/`) that modify specific `IValueWithModifier`s in an `IValueWithModifiersGroup`. `FallingDataMultiplier` is an example of how a `ModifierResource` would be implemented. (however, `WallDragging` uses `WallDraggingData` to modify a `Falling`, and `WallDraggingData` is both a `ResourceWithModifiers` and an `IModifierGroup` (since the wall dragging data itself can be modified)).

## Software Design Notes

### "Velocity Sources/Aggregate" Design

In order to perform complex movement while maintaining modularity and reusability, the different causes of movement are split into different, independent components called "velocity sources". A "velocity aggregate" is composed of these velocity sources, and can produce a single velocity vector by taking an aggregate of the velocity vectors for all the velocity sources (by default, this is just the sum of all the velocity vectors). This single velocity vector would represent the velocity of the player or some other entity.

For example, the velocity of my player in this repository breaks down into two components: `Falling` (velocity affected by gravity) and `LeftRight` (velocity due to the player wanting to move left or right) (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/VelocitySources/`.

Note that when creating the velocity sources for an entity's movement, some desired behaviors are not independent of these components. For example, my player can also jump and drag on walls, but these are both things that are affected by gravity, something already covered by `Falling`. So, instead of creating a velocity source for these behaviors, you would want to create an "intermediate" (they currently don't have a common superclass/interface) that calls the methods of the relevant velocity source(s) to affect velocity. For example, the intermediates `Jumping` and `WallDragging` (located in `Scripts/Entity/Physics/Intermediate/`) call upon `Falling`'s methods to affect falling velocity.

The velocity sources themselves are independent of each other and don't know about each other, but the velocity aggregate may produce rules and behaviors for interactions (one-way or two-way) between velocity sources/intermediates, unbeknownst to the velocity sources and intermediates. The velocity aggregate is where all of these velocity sources and intermediates come together. So, when subclassing a velocity source, the job of the subclass is to make sure that the specific velocity sources and intermediates concerned by the subclass act nicely with each other, to produce the desired behavior. This is done here so that it doesn't have to be done in the code for the velocity sources and intermediates (which would've introduced unwanted dependencies between certain velocity sources/intermediates).

This design uses the Component pattern, where the velocity sources and intermediates are the components, and the velocity aggregates compose these components.

#### Motivation

In [a much earlier commit](https://github.com/uuhhhh/Learning/tree/43573f5a37a382273acd1792acb342684beda854) in this repository, the code for the player movement was in one class, including left/right movement, ground/air/wall jumping, coyote jumping, jump buffering, jump cancelling, wall dragging, and smooth movement using Tweens. It did work properly, and for some project scopes, it'd be sufficient to keep player movement code in one class. However, there were key drawbacks to that approach, which this current repository aims to solve.

First, movement behaviors weren't reusable between different entities. While currently the only entity is the player, if one wanted to make another entity with some of the player's movement behaviors and some of its own movement behaviors, nontrivial amounts of code would have to be duplicated. This is unsustainable, especially if there were to be even more different entities. The separation of movement behaviors into independent, reusable components aims to solve this issue, where the entities can be composed of the components of the movement features they need, without duplicating code.

Second, the more different movement features are added to this player movement class, the less maintainable the class becomes. This is because with more movement features, there are more and more rules for these features and their interactions. Even with just the 2D platformer MVP, there are a lot of rules in play, even if it may not look like it. Some examples are:
- What happens when the player transitions from the air to the ground while stopping, and there's different horizontal movement acceleration for the ground and air
- How much control the player should have over their horizontal movement speed moments after a wall jump
- The exact conditions for when the player should start wall dragging instead of falling normally
- What should happen if the player touches the ground or a wall while a coyote jump timer is still active
- And much more

With more and more rules, it can become harder to make changes to this player movement class without breaking something, especially when trying to utilize the power of Godot's Tweens while doing so. So, the separation of movement behaviors into components accomplishes another thing: it separates the concerns of different rules into different classes. For instance, `Falling` can concern rules of when exactly to accelerate and decelerate; `Jumping` can concern rules of which type of jump (ground/air/wall jump) to use and when, as well as rules of coyote jumping and jump buffering; velocity sources and intermediates, internally, don't have to worry about Tweens from other velocity sources; etc. `PlayerVelocityAggregate` no longer has to worry about lower-level rules such as exact Tween creation processes, and the internal rules of its velocity sources and intermediates.

### "Data Modifiers" Design

In order to modify a data value (for example, how fast the player should move horizontally when on the ground), when there may be other actors that want to modify this same data value, we would like to maintain independence (as much of it as possible) from these other actors, in terms of how we add our modification to this data value.

The way that this project does this is by having the data value (`IValueWithModifiers`) hold any number of modifiers (`IModifier`). Each `IModifier` can take in a value and output a modified value based on that value. For the `IValueWithModifiers` to calculate the modified value, the first modifier gets applied to the unmodified value, then the second modifier gets applied to the first modifier's calculated value, and so on. The order the `IModifier`s are applied are based on the priority property for each of them. The only spot where these `IModifier`s have dependence on each other is with the priority property, and that is mitigated by having this property be an enum (see `Scripts/Values/Modifiers/ModifierPriority.cs`). They are independent everywhere else.

These `IModifier`s act in a way like components of an `IValueWithModifiers`. Unlike with the velocity sources, though, the `IValueWithModifiers` and its implementers don't work with specific `IModifiers`: they just apply the `IModifier`s they're given, without knowing their implementation or how they modify given values. This has the added benefit of ensuring independence of `IValueWithModifiers` from specific `IModifier`s.

#### Motivation

When I was first implementing the intermediate `WallDragging`, I needed it to modify `Falling` so that the falling movement was instead more like the movement of dragging down a wall. Originally, I did this by having the `WallDragging` swap out the `FallingData` that the `Falling` used for determining fall movement, for a different `FallingData`. However, this solution had a problem: if I were to make another intermediate that modified a `Falling` in the same way, there would be a conflict between the two. What happens when `WallDragging` does its swap, the other one does its swap, and `WallDragging` swaps it back? What if I wanted the effects of the two to somehow stack?

This is the problem that the data modifiers design aims to solve. By having the values in `FallingData` accept any amount of modifiers, `WallDragging` and any other intermediates can add and remove their modifiers to and from `FallingData` independently of each other, and the effects of the different modifiers can stack without the different intermediates having to know about it.

## Acknowledgement
This project started off as a learning project for me to learn Godot (hence the repository name "Learning") that followed [this tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL9FzW-m48fn0i9GYBoTY-SI3yOBZjH1kJ), but has since then deviated greatly in terms of code, content, and goals (also the tutorial used GDScript and not C#).
